---
title: "Post from Dec 08, 2025"
date: 2025-12-08T12:55:31
slug: "1765198531"
tags:
  - sdkit
  - easydiffusion
---

The new engine that'll power Easy Diffusion's upcoming v4 release (i.e. [sdkit3](https://github.com/easydiffusion/sdkit/tree/v3)) has now been integrated into Easy Diffusion. It's available to test by selecting **v4 engine** in the `Settings` tab (after enabling `Beta`). Please press `Save` and restart Easy Diffusion after selecting this.



It uses [stable-diffusion.cpp](https://github.com/leejet/stable-diffusion.cpp) and [ggml](https://github.com/ggml-org/ggml) under-the-hood, and produces optimized, lightweight builds for the target hardware.



The main benefits of Easy Diffusion's new engine are:

1. Very lightweight - Less than 100 MB install footprint, compared to 3 GB+ for Forge and other PyTorch-based engines.

2. Much better for AMD/Intel/Integrated users - avoids the hot mess of ROCm and DirectML, by using a reliable Vulkan backend (that's also used in `llama.cpp`).

3. Opportunity for even faster image generation in the future - this currently uses stock sd.cpp, which has room for further optimization.

4. Support for older GPUs - Vulkan supports older GPUs, especially older AMD GPUs unsupported by ROCm/PyTorch.



This supports:

* Windows, Linux, Mac

* NVIDIA, AMD, Intel GPUs (including integrated)



Users on Easy Diffusion's [Discord Server](https://discord.com/invite/u9yhsFmEkB) have already been trying it out, and it seems to work reasonably well. Atleast as well as I can expect for the first release of a fundamentally different engine for ED.



This is "future work". It's still missing a few features and has a few bugs (tracked [here](https://github.com/users/cmdr2/projects/16/views/5)). It will take a while before it is ready for widespread use.



But for AMD users, ED4 is sometimes already better than ED 3.5/Forge (which uses ROCm/DirectML, and doesn't work reliably for many AMD users). So that's why ED4's new engine has been fast-tracked for early release.