---
title: "Post from Jun 17, 2025"
date: 2025-06-17T05:01:14
slug: "1750136474"
tags:
  - easydiffusion
  - blog
---
Development update for Easy Diffusion - It's chugging along in starts and stops. Broadly, there are three tracks:

- Maintenance: The past few months have seen increased support for AMD, Intel and integrated GPUs. This includes AMD on Windows. Added support for the new AMD 9060/9070 cards last week, and the new NVIDIA 50xx cards in March.

- Flux to the main branch / release v3.5 to stable: Right now, Flux / v3.5 still requires you to enable ED beta first. And then install Forge. Last week I got Flux working in our main engine (with decent rendering speed). It still needs more work to support all the different models formats for Flux. Using Forge was a temporary arrangement, until Flux worked in our main engine.

- ED v4: I'm continuing to work on a new C++ based engine for ED 4 (based on ggml), which will allow ED to start up in less than a second, and have a significantly smaller download size. The new engine will also use quantization a lot more. Initially, only a few models will be supported in the new engine, so I think power users will continue using the v3.5 engine for advanced models.

Maintenance is going on regularly. Flux is now my active project again, as of last week. I spent a lot of time on ED 4 in Feb and Mar (and contributed code to ggml), but I've paused work on that until Flux goes to ED's stable branch.

The past few months have been a bit chaotic for me wrt time, since we were moving houses. I usually work one day a week on ED, sometimes less.